Hello, hello hello, and welcome to English
Learning for Curious Minds, by Leonardo
English, the show where you can listen
to fascinating stories and learn weird
and wonderful things about the world at
the same time as improving your English.
I'm Alastair Budge, and today,
we are going to be talking
about the history of perfume.
It is a curious story that takes
us from Ancient Mesopotamia to
the Middle East, from southern
France to modern airport terminals.
So, I hope you’ll enjoy it.
OK then, let’s get right into it and
talk about the history of perfume.
As any language learner knows,
some words are best left in their
original version, not translated.
This is certainly true with French, a
language people have long associated with
beauty, sophistication, and elegance.
And perhaps nowhere is it more true
than when it comes to French words
relating to something that France is
rightfully very proud of: perfume.
Take, for example, the small town
in southern France that is the
perfume capital of the world: Grasse.
A name that evokes the fields
of lavender and jasmine used in
the world’s finest fragrances.
But if you translate it into English?
Well… Grasse just means “fat.”
And what about the title given to
the greatest perfumers—the masters of
scent, the artists who create the most
luxurious fragrances in the world?
In French, they are called “grands
nez”—which means “great nose.”
Or, if you were being particularly
uncharitable, you might
translate it as… “big nose.”
We’ll come to learn more about what it
takes to become a “big nose”, or rather
a “grand nez”, later on in the episode,
but first, we must wind the clocks back
and talk about the early days of perfume.
And these early days were early indeed.
The tradition of creating a scent
and either covering your body in
it or spraying it around a room
goes back much further than modern
France, further than Rome, and even
further than the pyramids of Egypt.
Some of the earliest evidence of creating
scents dates back more than 4,000 years
to Mesopotamia, in modern-day Iraq.
And, from the very beginning,
it had two purposes.
The first was ritualistic; people
burned aromatic resins, woods, and
spices as offerings to their gods.
The idea was simple: if something
smelled heavenly, it was probably
appreciated by the heavens.
The other, well, it was for
a far more practical reason.
Today we live in a world where most
people have showers in their houses,
soap is cheap, deodorant is everywhere,
and there really is no valid reason
to not wash yourself regularly.
But clearly, this is a
relatively modern phenomenon.
Go back a few centuries—or even
just 100 years—and the world
was a much smellier place.
Without modern hygiene, strong body
odours were just a part of life.
Sweat, unwashed clothes, the lingering
scent of livestock or open sewage in
the streets, it was all unavoidable,
the world was just smellier.
And so, perfume wasn’t just about smelling
nice, it was about covering up reality.
So, how were these early perfumes created?
Well, the process was not too
dissimilar to modern perfume making.
They would extract the fragrant
oils from flowers, resins, and
spices, and distil them to leave
only the best-smelling scents.
These scents were often used as religious
offerings, both being burned in temples,
and with priests dousing themselves
with them during ceremonies, scents
like frankincense and myrrh, which
you might remember as being gifts the
Three Kings brought to the baby Jesus.
But perfume wasn’t just for the
gods; it was also for the living,
a way to have pleasant scents that
followed you everywhere you went.
And perhaps nowhere was this more
true than in Ancient Egypt, where
perfume became a serious status symbol.
For the Egyptians, scent was as
important as gold or fine clothing.
The wealthy bathed in perfumed oils,
covered their wigs in fragrant wax,
and carried scented cones on their
heads that would melt throughout the
day, slowly releasing pleasant aromas.
One theory about why perfume became
particularly popular in Egypt is
one that you might have guessed.
Egypt is hot!
A burning desert sun, long, sweaty
days, and—like everywhere else
in the ancient world—no soap, no
deodorant, and no running water.
Sure, as a wealthy and status-seeking
Egyptian, you might have had people
fanning you down and carrying you
around in a chariot so you didn’t have
to break a sweat, but if you wanted
to avoid smelling too much like an
overworked donkey, perfume was essential.
And even the dead wore perfume.
The mummification process involved
covering bodies in frankincense,
myrrh, and aromatic oils, not just
for preservation, but so that the dead
would smell divine in the afterlife.
And then, of course, there was Cleopatra.
She is said to have been
obsessed with perfume.
When she sailed to meet Mark Antony, so
the legend goes, she had the sails of
her boat soaked in perfume so that long
before he saw her, he could smell her.
It’s a dramatic story, perhaps not one
based in any historical truth, but it
is also a clever reminder of the power
of scent: to create an impression,
to seduce, and to linger in someone’s
mind long after you’ve left the room.
By the way, if you’d like to learn
more about the fascinating life of
Cleopatra, episode 461 is the one for you.
But, if the Egyptians perfected
the art of perfume, the Romans
took its use to the extreme.
Romans bathed in scented waters,
and doused their clothes, furniture,
and even their horses in fragrance.
Some even had perfume fountains at
their extravagant banquets, spraying
scented mist over their guests.
And, of course, perfume had a very
practical function in Rome, because,
once again, people smelled bad.
Public baths helped, but let’s
not forget that Roman cities
had open sewers, unwashed togas,
and streets filled with animals.
If you were wealthy, you covered
yourself in perfume to stand apart
from the sweaty, unwashed masses.
In fact, perfume became so popular in
Rome that it started to be imported from
all over the world: Arabian myrrh, Indian
cinnamon, and North African flowers.
It was a booming industry, and the
average Roman senator’s daily perfume
consumption would probably even put a
member of the Kardashian family to shame.
But with the fall of the Roman Empire,
perfume’s prominence faded in much
of Europe, at least for a while.
While Europe “forgot” about
perfume for several centuries, the
Middle East became its new home.
During the Islamic Golden Age, from
the 8th to the 13th centuries, Arabic
and Persian scientists revolutionised
the way perfumes were made.
They perfected distillation, which is a
technique that allowed for the extraction
of pure, concentrated scents, and is still
a method used in modern perfume-making.
And from here, from the Middle East,
the knowledge of perfume spread back
into Europe, carried along trade routes
from the Middle East to Italy, Spain,
and to the country that would become
the spiritual home of perfume, France.
If you were to ask someone today
which country is most associated
with perfume, the answer would
almost certainly be France.
And it is a well-deserved reputation.
Because while the Romans indulged in
excess, and the Middle East perfected
the science, it was in France
that perfume became an art form.
But why France?
And why Grasse, the small town you
heard about at the start of the
episode that still calls itself
the perfume capital of the world?
Well, strangely enough, it all
comes down to leather gloves.
In the 16th century, Grasse was
famous for its glove-making industry.
But there was one problem:
they smelled terrible.
This was real leather, made from the skin
of dead cows, and as anyone who has ever
spent any time at a tannery will know, the
process of making leather smells very bad.
So, local artisans began scenting the
gloves with floral extracts to mask the
unpleasant odour, to hide the nasty smell.
This small innovation led
to a huge transformation.
The demand for scented products grew,
and soon, combined with increased
taxes on leather, Grasse’s leather
industry faded away, replaced by
something far more profitable: perfume.
And by the time of King Louis XIV, in
the late 17th and early 18th century,
perfume was no longer just a luxury;
it was a necessity at the royal court.
The King of France was famously obsessed
with fragrance, and the halls of
his palace at Versailles were filled
with the smells of perfumed waters,
scented gloves, and aromatic balls.
At a time when bathing was still rare,
perfume became a way of covering up
unpleasant realities, not just for
individuals, but for entire rooms.
Fountains in Versailles were
filled with orange blossom water,
and royal furniture was sprayed
with lavender and rose extracts.
And it was during this time
that the modern perfume
industry began to take shape.
Perfumers in Grasse and Paris began
refining their distillation techniques,
using alcohol instead of oil to create
lighter, more wearable fragrances.
These would be packaged up into
beautiful little bottles, not too
dissimilar to the stylised bottles
that perfume comes in today.
And by the 18th and 19th centuries,
perfume was no longer just for royalty;
it was for anyone who could afford it.
Still, it was not cheap, but
it became something that was
available not just for a king.
And this brings us to a big question:
why is perfume still so expensive?
Even if you don’t buy perfume yourself,
you will probably have walked through the
duty-free section of an airport or perhaps
visited a high-end department store.
And you’ll know that
perfume doesn’t come cheap.
A small bottle from a luxury brand
can easily set you back €100 or more,
and some even sell for thousands.
But, if it’s just smelly
water, why is it so expensive?
Well, this isn’t a sponsored message
from Chanel or the tourist authority of
Grasse, but there are some good reasons.
First, there’s the cost of ingredients.
Some of the world’s most famous
perfumes contain materials that are
incredibly rare and difficult to obtain.
Take, for example, oud, which is a resin
produced by a particular type of tree
when it becomes infected with mould.
It’s one of the most expensive
raw materials in the world,
costing more per gram than gold.
And even things that seem more
run-of-the-mill, more ordinary,
like jasmine and rose, which are
used in many classic perfumes.
It takes thousands of petals to
produce just a few millilitres of
essential oil, and harvesting them is
a delicate, time-consuming process.
And then there are the synthetic
ingredients, which allow perfumers
to create scents that don’t exist
in nature, like the smell of fresh
linen or a salty ocean breeze.
These molecules can be incredibly
expensive to develop, and some take
years of research before they’re ready
to be used in a commercial fragrance.
So it’s not so dissimilar to some
pharmaceutical drugs, where the raw
materials might not be expensive, but
all of the research and development
that goes into creating them is,
so that’s what you’re paying for.
And, lest we forget, there’s the branding.
When you buy a bottle of perfume,
you’re not just paying for the liquid
inside, you’re paying for the name, the
bottle design, the advertising, and the
luxury experience that comes with it.
Perfume brands spend hundreds of
millions on celebrity endorsements,
high-profile marketing campaigns,
and exclusive product launches.
That little bottle on the shelf has been
carefully positioned to make you feel
like you’re not just buying a fragrance
but a piece of a glamorous world.
Of course, not all perfumes are expensive.
There are plenty of more affordable
options out there, but the reason some
fragrances command such high prices
is this combination of craftsmanship,
rarity, and clever marketing.
And behind every great perfume,
there’s a person who created it.
The term for someone who creates a perfume
is a “nez”, a nose, and when you get to
the top of your game, when you have the
most highly-trained nose in the world,
this is when you might be given the
title of un “grand nez”, a great nose.
Now, becoming a grand nez isn’t
something that you or I can “apply
for”, and it certainly isn’t
something that happens overnight.
It takes years of training, a truly
exceptional sense of smell, and an ability
to create complex, layered compositions.
It isn’t an official title, and
there is no official list of “grand
nez”, but it’s thought that there are
fewer than 100 worldwide, with some
estimates putting it at as little as 30.
In fact, saying “worldwide” is a little
deceptive, as most of them are in
France, split between Paris and Grasse.
And something that might be surprising,
is that despite the fact that most
perfume has historically been made
for women, the industry of being a
“nez”, and especially the “grand nez”
at the very top of the profession,
has traditionally been a male one.
Now, this is changing; women’s perfume
has gone from being around 85% of
the market to 60%, and there are
more women getting involved in the
business of making perfume, but it is
a curiosity that it has traditionally
been the noses of men that have decided
what the noses of women would enjoy.
Now, before we end this perfumed journey,
I want to leave you with some interesting
facts about the life of a “nez”.
Firstly, although you might imagine one
of these “grand nez” to always smell
fantastic, and to be covered head to
toe with fragrance when they come into
the office in the morning, they aren’t.
They have to avoid strong smells,
precisely so that there is nothing
interfering with their ability to detect
the subtle nuances of different smells.
Secondly, and on a related point
and bucking the French stereotype,
they must avoid garlic, as well
as other spicy foods, because
they too mean that you can’t
differentiate as well between scents.
And further defying certain French
stereotypes, most grand nez also
steer clear of coffee, cigarettes
and alcohol for the same reasons.
Thirdly, apparently, they do most of
their hardest work in the morning.
This isn’t some productivity hack,
but rather that everyone’s sense of
smell is most sensitive in the morning.
And if your job relies on your sense of
smell, well, I guess it does make sense to
do the most important work in the morning.
And while the job might seem glamorous,
it’s also incredibly challenging.
The competition is fierce, and trends
in the perfume industry change rapidly.
One year, everyone wants fresh,
citrusy scents; the next, warm and
woody fragrances are in demand.
A perfumer has to be both an
artist and a scientist, constantly
experimenting, refining, and adapting.
But if they succeed, their
work can last for generations.
Some of the most famous perfumes
in history were created decades ago
and are still bestsellers today.
Chanel No.
5, for example, has been around for over
a hundred years and remains one of the
most iconic fragrances in the world.
So the next time you walk past a perfume
counter and catch a familiar scent in
the air, pause for a moment to think
about the journey it took to get there.
From the ancient temples of Mesopotamia
to the laboratories of modern
perfumers, from the rarest natural
ingredients to the synthetic molecules
designed to mimic them, perfume is
much more than just a pleasant smell.
It’s history, it’s science, it’s art.
And above all, it’s something that
connects us, across cultures, across
time, through the power of scent.
OK then, that is it for today's episode
on the curious history of perfume.
I hope it's been an interesting one,
and that you've learnt something new.
As always, I would love to know
what you thought about this episode.
You can head right into our
community forum, which is at
community.leonardoenglish.com and get
chatting away to other curious minds.
You've been listening to English Learning
for Curious Minds by Leonardo English.
I'm Alastair Budge, you stay safe, and
I'll catch you in the next episode.